Introduction to algorithms: recipes, checklists, flowcharts

Algorithms are at the crux of all computing. But if you have never had a decent computer science class, you probably either never heard the word "algorithm" or heard it as a magical incantation explaining the inner workings of certain social media. But it is nothing mystical. 

An "algorithm", simply speaking, is an unambiguous set of instructions on how to do something. 

An algorithm must describe a sequence of actions and their order. In other words, a good food recipe is an example of an algorithm. A lousy recipe, on the other hand, is a disaster. 
Perfect short-grain rice, version 1.0
Get some rice.
Boil the rice.
Add salt.
Done!
Humans are fantastic computers. Most of us have enough contextual knowledge about the world and food to follow imprecise recipes and still get results that won't kill us. But unless you have cooked rice enough times to know the exact steps to get boiled rice, following this recipe will likely leave you with undercooked grains, burned rice, slurry porridge, or all of the above simultaneously. Even if you know how to boil the rice, you can notice that the recipe is useless. It doesn't even explain anything; it just says that perfect rice is boiled salted rice.

Perfect short-grain rice, version 2.0
Place water and rice in a pot over medium heat.
When the water starts to boil, lower the heat to low and cover the pot with a lid.
Leave for 18 minutes.
Remove the pot from the heat and leave for another 15 minutes.
Perfect rice is ready!
Remember to wash the rice before cooking, then soak it for a few hours.
You will need two cups of rice and 600 ml of water.
This recipe is much more likely to yield "perfect short-grain rice," but it still has a few issues. Imagine you started following this recipe. You got a pot and placed all the rice you've had into it, topping it up with an amount of water that seemed reasonable at the time. You followed all the steps til step five, only to discover that instead of "perfect rice", you made an unedible mess again. You look at step six and realise that you did not wash the rice before cooking, though it probably couldn't explain why it burned. Finally, you see step seven and realise that the ratio of rice to water is also important. The instructions themselves, each separately, were not wrong, but the order of the instructions makes the difference between a successful result and a failure. 

Inspired, you rush to the nearest shop for a new rice pack. When you are back home, you reorder the instructions in the recipe and start cooking again. You measure the rice and the water, wash the rice, and stumble on the next step. Do you soak the rice now while it is uncooked, or do you soak it after it is cooked? Step six, "soak the rice", was specified after step five, "rice is ready", but it makes more sense to you to soak uncooked rice, so you take the gamble. Some 45 minutes later, you discover that the rice, while cooked, is still a bit burned. Unfortunately, the recipe did not explain that "a cup" is a specific US volume measure roughly equal to 236.6 ml, and your favourite tea cup is quite a bit larger.

Perfect short-grain rice, version 3.0
Take 400 grams of uncooked short-grain rice.
Rinse the rice.
Soak the rice in water for two hours.
Move the rice to a pot and top it with 600 ml of water. 
Place the pot on the stove and turn on medium heat.
When the water starts to boil, lower the stove's heat to low and cover the pot with a lid.
Leave the rice to cook for 18 minutes.
Turn off the stove. Remove the pot from the stove and leave it standing for another 15 minutes without removing the lid.
Perfect rice is ready!
The recipe steps now provide "a clear set of instructions on how to do something." The only difference between this recipe and an algorithm is that the instructions are not necessarily unambiguous. However, whether these instructions are ambiguous depends on the "performer" of the instructions. For example, a skilled cook knows that a glassware pot is unsuitable for their gas stove and will pick a metal pot for cooking this recipe. A novice cook, presented with a range of pots, might make the mistake of taking a Pyrex pot, and the recipe will yield glass pot shards instead of perfect rice.

Finding out what instructions might be ambiguous for the "performer" or "computer" of the algorithm usually comes with practice. Even experienced software engineers often make incorrect assumptions about the instructions they command to the computers, resulting in undesirable outcomes, colloquially known as "bugs"!
