# Flourish PC for computer engineers and hobbyists

Building computers is hard because making computers work is hard. How do we know? Because we make computers work, as a profession and as a hobby. Whether you are building a new computer, repairing a broken one, or ensuring that the existing computer does what you need, you are bound to face some difficulties. This project aims to address some of them.

## Abstractions can be obstructions
A famous software engineering joke states that we can solve any problem by introducing a new level of abstraction, except for the problem of too many levels of abstraction. Many computer engineers know that this joke isn't a joke.

Frontend engineers, backend engineers, compiler engineers, low-level software engineers, network engineers, electronic engineers. Sometimes you "gotta catch them all" to debug a single issue because you need people who know what is hidden behind the abstractions you use.

One way to "catch them all" is to become a jane of all trades. Look inside the black boxes, learn what they are made of and how to fix them. We will try to provide the bare minimum required to open the black boxes you likely will meet. We will also teach you how to make simple black boxes. But figuring out the specifics of _your_ black boxes we will leave to you, dear reader.

## KISS (keep it short and sweet)
If we were to teach you _everything_  jane of all trades might encounter while building a computer, we'd have to create an all-encompassing textbook. This is an unrealistic goal, of course. Maybe you don't even want to become a jane of all trades. What now?

Well, good news then! We are going to start with _really_ simple computers. We will aim to make those so simple that a single person can understand them quickly. Naturally, many of the features you expect to see in computers will be missing in those simplified designs. However, these designs are still going to be practical.

## If it works, it's (probably) not stupid
Abstractions can save an incredible amount of time when working as expected. We will offer you plenty of shortcuts to use if you prefer to avoid digging too deep. If you are lucky, they might "just work" for you. Worst case scenario? You will need to take the long way round.

[**Next**](./001.md)
