# Flourish PC for frugal and affordable personal computing

## Retro computing and frugal computing
If you are lucky, you might be able to get an old-ish computer really cheap or even for free. But sooner or earlier, you are going to face a few challenges. The first is the compatibility/interoperability of your computer and other computers. Finding drivers and software and even transferring files onto/from the device can be challenging. The second one is repairability: How can you find and replace faulty parts if something breaks? Well, one of the options is to apply the Flourish PC framework to your computer. But, please remember that this isn't necessarily the easiest or best option.

## A personal phone is not a personal computer
Mass-production brought cheap smartphones and feature phones to everyone. According to Statista, today (in 2022), 91% of the world's population owns a relatively powerful portable computing device. Could these computing devices be used for personal computing? The answer is most probably "No".

The problem here lies in the fact that those devices are not multi-purpose devices and often cannot be repurposed. Usually, self-hosting software engineering tools, tools for electrical and mechanical design, databases and even access to the digital libraries are limited or absent from these platforms. In addition, the device's interfacing options and range of peripherals can be very limited, too.

## What mass-produced computing devices are missing?
### Software
Mass-produced microcontroller units and mobile phones are customer/embedded devices and not shipped with software that could turn them into self-hosted solutions. At times when it is possible to replace or enhance built-in software, with all the likelihood, you will need to borrow a full-fledged PC and Internet access.

### Hardware
Without the ability to connect external devices to your computer, its usefulness is going to be limited. If your device has a USB host port, your peripherals must have USB controllers. If your device has Bluetooth, your peripherals need to have a Bluetooth controller. That means you are either relying on mass-produced peripherals (which can be pricey or hard to get) or will need to acquire said controllers in a form you can use (which can be even harder to get).

## What are _we_ missing without personal computers?
Let's say no general-purpose computing devices are accessible in your community. What does it mean? At the very least:
* Options for education and research are going to be severely limited.
* Anything but simple mechanical and electrical designs will be unattainable or very expensive.
* Self-replicating technologies like 3D printers are beyond your reach.

## What can we do about it?
There are at least three options (and their combinations) to consider in such a situation.

### Let's turn a phone into a personal computer
Depending on your phone model and your access to the Internet, you might be able to convert your device into a personal computer by replacing your phone's software and connecting it to various peripheral devices. We are going to cover possible options in a separate chapter. But do not keep your hopes too high: chances are you might need to build a computing device to interface with the CPU in your phone to make it genuinely general-purpose.

### Let's build a very cheap personal computer
It is possible to buy a cheap CPU module for a general-purpose personal computer for under $5. But to make it useable, one would need to invest in peripheral devices, like screen and keyboard, which will at least triple the setup cost. You might also end up with peripheral devices being powered by more powerful chips than your actual computer is. We will explore different options for building both computing modules and input/output devices while considering possible expenses.

### Let's scavenge the parts to build a personal computer
Plenty of computer parts can be scavenged from broken or discarded electronic devices. For example, a decommissioned five-year-old inkjet printer would likely have a powerful ARM processor, megabytes of memory chips, and a wireless network module. Even twenty to thirty-year-old devices will probably have computer parts that could be scavenged and repurposed.

## Can I use such a "frugal" computer for anything useful?
A "smart" IKEA lightbulb is powerful enough to run Doom. Of course, you won't be able to play any modern games on a device of comparable power. Still, it is certainly powerful enough to run many valuable tools.

[Next](../000/002.md)
