# Basics of math

While teaching the basics of science is outside of the scope of this project, we think it is still important to provide you with some reference material that can get you started.

## Numeral systems
Computers are operating on numbers, but the way they store and process numbers can be different from what you are used to. The most common numeral system in computing is the _binary_ system. To understand it, first let's review the systems you are likely comfortable with: unary and decimal.

## Unary numeral system
The simplest way to represent the number N is to show N times the symbol for "one".

For example, if you have 5 apples, you can represent the number by drawing five circles:
`ooooo`

This form of representation of numbers is called _unary_. It is very graphic when you work with small numbers and simple operations. Addition and subtraction operations in such a system might be written this way:
```
oo + oooo = oooooo
oooo - o = ooo
```

Using circles or stones instead of real apples is one of the simplest ways of _coding_. Because _coding_ is just a way of representing information about the real world!

## Decimal numeral system
The most common numeral system among humans is a decimal numeral system. It is so widespread we don't even clarify that our numbers are written using the decimal numeral system. It is fairly convenient for recording large numbers and advanced operations, like multiplication and division:
```
12345678 + 87654321 = 99999999
512 * 12 = 6144
262144 / 64 = 4096
```

Decimal numeral system is a _positional_ numeral system. If one circle means "one apple" in unary system, then both "oO" and "Oo" would mean "two apples". In a positional numeral system, the position of the symbol (a "digit") has different meanings depending on where it is in the number: i.e. 21 and 12 represent different number of physical objects, even if they use the very same digits.

Each digit in the decimal number, right to left, represents the number of ones, tens, hundreds, thousands, tens of thousands and so on. It is more obvious if you spell a long number out loud:
```
56789 is fifty-six thousands, seven hundreds and eighty-nine

50000 +
 6000 +
  700 +
   80 +
    9
------
56789    
```

The positional numeral system means that we can group the digits by position. Hopefully, this representation can help to visualise the way decimal numbers work.
```
123 + 456 = ...

  100 + 20 + 3
+ 400 + 50 + 6
--------------
  500 + 70 + 9 = 579
```

## Binary numeral system
The most common numeral system for computing is a binary system. It only uses digits "0" and "1", which can be conveniently represented in digital computers by the presence and absence of the voltage, which simplifies the design of the computers. When decimal system counts tens, hundreds and thousands, the binary system counts ones, pairs, fours, eights, sixteens, and so on. Let's see:
```
decimal | binary    | decimal          
     0  |     0     | 0          
     1  |     1     | 1*ones          
     2  |    10     | 1*pair + 0*ones           
     3  |    11     | 1*pair + 1*ones          
     4  |   100     | 1*fours + 0*pairs + 0*ones          
     5  |   101     | 1*fours + 0*pairs + 1*ones          
     7  |   111     | 1*fours + 1*pairs + 1*ones          
     8  |  1000     | 1*eights           
    14  |  1110     | 1*eights + 1*fours + 1*pairs           
    16  | 10000     |             
   ...  |   ...     |    
   255  | 11111111  |               
```

Being a positional system, binary system can be used in the same way as a decimal system. The rules for addition, subtraction, multiplication, division and so on will still apply to binary numbers, but you always need to remember that in binary system, 1 + 1 equals 10.
```
decimal         binary
  14              1110
+ 19           + 10011
----           -------
  33            100001

14 + 19 = (1+1)*10 + (4+9)*1 = 20 + 13 = (2+1)*10 + 3 = 33
1110 + 10011 = (0+1)*sixteens + (1+0)*eights + (1+0)*fours + (1+1)*pairs + (0+1)*ones =
= 1*sixteens + 1*eights + (1+1)*fours + 0*pairs + 1*ones =
= 1*sixteens + (1+1)*eights + 0*fours + 0*pairs + 1*ones =
= (1+1)*sixteens + 0*eights + 0*fours + 0*pairs + 1*ones =
= 1*thirty-twos + 1*ones = 100001
```

Binary numbers are clumsy and long for humans to operate, but they are perfect for computers.

## Hexadecimal numeral system
Hexadecimal system is often used as a bridge between humans and computers. It is much more compact than binary, and it is easy to convert numbers to and from binary with it. As you might guess, hexadecimal system counts 16s, `16*16s`, `16*16*16s` and so on. It has more digits than decimal system, so the digits for 10 to 15 are represented with letters from A to F. To Each hexadecimal digit can be represented by a group of four binary digits:
```
hexadecimal | binary | decimal
         0  |  0000  |  0
         1  |  0001  |  1
         2  |  0010  |  2
         3  |  0011  |  3
         4  |  0100  |  4
         5  |  0101  |  5
         6  |  0110  |  6
         7  |  0111  |  7
         8  |  1000  |  8
         9  |  1001  |  9
         A  |  1010  |  10
         B  |  1011  |  11
         C  |  1100  |  12
         D  |  1101  |  13
         E  |  1110  |  14
         F  |  1111  |  15
        10  | 10000  |  16
```

To differentiate hexadecimal numbers from decimal numbers, hexadecimal numbers are usually written with "0x" prepended or "h" in appended:
```
0x100 = 100h = 256
```

Hexadecimals are very convenient for the representation of binary-encoded computer data. For example, here is the beginning of this file encoded with binary ASCII code, but shown in hexadecimal:
```
23  20  42  61  73  69  63  73  20  6f  66  20  6d  61  74  68
0a  0a  57  68  69  6c  65  20  74  65  61  63  68  69  6e  67
20  74  68  65  20  62  61  73  69  63  73  20  6f  66  20  73
63  69  65  6e  63  65  20  69  73  20  6f  75  74  73  69  64
```
