# Safety and your mind
Building a computer is a demanding project. You are inevitably going to face complex frustrating problems. Therefore, looking after your mental health is crucial for the project's success. It would be best if you kept your head calm and focused. Otherwise, you risk endangering your well-being, making mistakes that could even ruin all your progress, or getting so frustrated with the project that you will never actually complete it.

Here are a few things you can do to keep your mental health in good shape.

### Healthy body and healthy habits
Your mind needs your body to be in good shape. Try a balanced diet, ensure you get good sleep, keep physically active, and avoid recreational drugs and alcohol. Please *do not* solder, drill, cut or operate any tools or heavy machinery when you are under the influence of drugs or alcohol, as it can be dangerous for you and people around you.

### Sadness, anxiety, frustration and other intense feelings
Intense feelings can influence your judgment and hand coordination. While experiencing feelings is a part of being human, it might be worth checking whether emotions affect your work and, if they do, do something about it.

Probably the simplest way to check your feelings is to listen to yourself. Trying a meditation technique for scanning your body can help identify your feelings and calm you down. To do a body scan, gently close your eyes, and focus for a few seconds on each part of your body, starting from the toes. How are you feeling now?

If you realise that you are feeling intense emotions and are struggling to keep them under control, you might want to consider seeking professional help. However, regardless of the availability of such services in your area, there are simple things you can do to help yourself.

### Emotional first aid kit
The first thing that you can do is 1-3 minute long breathing exercises. You can start with taking a deep breath and counting up to 4, then holding your breath while counting up to 6, and then slowly exhaling while counting up to 4. If you are struggling to repeat this breathing exercise, instead of pacing your breaths start with just counting them; one for inhaling, two for exhaling, three for inhaling, and so on, up to ten; then start counting your breaths from the beginning.

The second thing that you can do is to prepare a self-care box. Get a box or a bag, and fill it with something that makes you feel comfortable or distracts you a little bit. Examples of things: a cosy blanket, a soft toy, a favourite mixtape, pictures and photos, favourite quotes, and letters of encouragement.

There are many more things that can help you manage your emotions, for instance, taking a cold shower or running. Find safe ways of expressing the emotions that work for you. Remember: do not bottle up your feelings; reach for help if self-help tools are not working for you.

[**Next**](../001/001.md)
