# Electricity and your body

**Disclaimer:** This document is _not_ an exhaustive manual on electric safety. It _was not_ written by an expert, and it _was not_ cross-checked with the regulations that might apply in your circumstances. Please use it as a starting point and never ignore the security information supplied with your devices.


----


Building digital electronic devices, including computers, is generally considered relatively safe. But it does not mean there are no risks to your health or life. Carelessness **kills**. You __need__ to know at least the basics.

### Nope, I am too cool for this boring lecture. Just tell me what to do!
If you were about to skip this section anyway, please make sure that you understand the following:
* Anything over 30V is dangerous. Avoid even touching it.
* Always wear non-conductive gloves. They can save your life.
* Know where your circuit breaker is.
* Do not disassemble power supply units, vacuum tube devices and CRTs.
* Do not touch capacitors and high-voltage circuits even after they're powered off.
* Never work alone, have someone around to pull you away from the danger. Make sure that at least they will know what to do.

## Electric trauma: risks and first aid
The most immediate risk from electronic devices is electric trauma. Electric trauma can happen when the electric current flows through a human's body. Electric trauma can cause paralysis, severe burns to the skin, severe internal burns and heart failure.

## What are the safe levels of voltages and currents?
Some guides state that the alternating current of 3 mA will burn you, the alternating current over 10 mA will paralyse the muscles, so it will be impossible to let go of the live wires, and AC over 25 mA can cause death. Most electricity sources, though, do not supply constant current; they supply constant voltage. The current, in turn, depends on the voltage and resistance (see "Basics of electronics" for details). The actual resistance depends on many variables, including the material you contact, your emotional state and room humidity.

If you are looking for general guidelines: according to American industrial standards, both DC and AC voltage under 30V are considered relatively safe. They won't cause paralysis when touched by a human in most cases, so the trauma victim should be able to avoid long-lasting health damage. The most common voltages in digital electronics are 3.3V, 5V and 12V, which should be reasonably safe to operate.

That makes domestic electricity wires at 110/220V AC absolutely _not safe_ to touch.

## What are especially dangerous things?
The answer lies in the fact that you cannot predict the current in most cases, but you can predict the voltage and take measures to increase your resistance by improving the isolation.

#### High-voltage circuitry.
Keep your hands away from the insides of power supply units unless you understand precisely what you do.

#### Non-isolated or insufficiently isolated wires are a danger.
Check your cables and wires for damage before using them. Avoid water and high humidity, as they can drastically reduce the effectiveness of isolation.

#### Wrong or faulty power supply.
One of the common causes of electric trauma is when the power supply starts to supply the wrong voltage. The isolation adequate for 5V wires will likely be insufficient if your power adapter is short to the mains and provides 110V AC instead of the expected 5V DC.

#### Capacitors and transformers, especially huge ones.
Those can be high-voltage devices. Capacitors store electrical energy even **after your device was powered off**. Better safe than sorry.

#### Vacuum tubes and CRT/Braun tubes.
Most vacuum tubes and all CRTs are high-voltage devices, with supplied voltage usually in the range of 100 and 30,000 volts. To make things worse, they are often connected to high-voltage capacitors and can pose a threat long after being powered off. Therefore, if you do not have the experience and tools to work with a CRT properly, you should not even attempt to take its cover off.

#### Motors and engines.
Those can be high-voltage equipment.

## How I can reduce the risks of sustaining an electric trauma?
* **Never** work alone when exposed to high voltage.
* **Never** use damaged equipment or live wires with damaged isolation.
* **Never** use both hands when operating high-voltage equipment.
* **Never** break the safety instructions, especially for high-voltage equipment.
* Know the risks.
* Do not take unnecessary risks.
* Use appropriate personal safety equipment, i.e. isolating gloves.
* Learn first aid and reanimation skills, ideally with a specialist.
* Make sure your circuit breaker, fuses and grounding are in working order.
* Check the voltage from your voltage supply.

## First aid after electric trauma
### In the case of severe trauma
1. Turn off the source of electricity. If impossible to turn off, move the trauma victim away from the current source using dry non-conductive objects (i.e., long, dry wooden or plastic stick).
2. Call the ambulance. Check the pulse, breathing and consciousness levels.
3. If there is no pulse, use the CAB reanimation technique or an automated defibrillator. CAB reanimation requires 30 presses to the chest and two mouth-to-mouth inspirations per minute.
4. Cool down the burns and cover with a sterile bandage.
5. Stop the bleeding. You might need to use a compression bandage for venous bleeding.
6. Immobilise mechanical trauma.
7. Wait for help to arrive.

### In the case of mild trauma
1. Cool down and treat the burns.
2. See a doctor as soon as possible.
3. Call the ambulance if the condition worsens.
