# Hazards you should know about

There are hazards and risks beyond electric trauma and low mood that might face you on your journey of building a computer. It is essential to know about them and prepare accordingly.

## Fire - exclamation mark - fire - exclamation mark
### Heat sources
You will likely need a soldering iron or another heat source for the electrical engineering of your computer. The soldering iron tip is usually as hot as 300-600 C. That is enough for many materials, including cloth, grease and paper, to catch fire. Therefore, do not leave your soldering equipment unattended. Always make sure that it is powered off when you are not working.

### Heated parts
The soldering iron will heat the parts you are soldering. It will make everything that iron touches, especially metals, very hot. Electric components, wires, soldering iron's tip, and your circuit board will all be hot enough to burn you.

### Electric current
The electric current produces heat. In fact, most of the energy computers use is converted into heat. It is normal for most computer devices to heat up to 45-70C (~113-158F); some power-hungry devices might get hotter than boiling water under normal conditions. Be aware that heat pads and the parts you are using might give you burns.

Sometimes the electronics you use might get out of normal conditions. For example, a faulty component or incorrect power supply might result in a current much higher than expected to flow through your board. Suppose the components won't be able to dissipate heat quickly enough. In that case, they can easily get beyond the ignition temperature of components themselves or parts around them. This might result in a fire. Therefore, please do not leave your electronics unattended. Use circuit breakers and fuses to limit the current drawn from the power supply.

### Batteries, especially lithium ones
Batteries store a lot of energy inside, especially lithium ones. Never short circuit them, and make sure they won't get short-circuited by accident due to contact with metals or corrosion caused by water. Some batteries swell with usage; those are especially dangerous, as they might explode. Please dispose of them (responsibly). Bottom line: batteries, especially ones containing lithium, can cause a nasty fire that will require special equipment to put out.

### Extinguishing a fire on your desk/workbench
If there is a fire around electronics, **never use water** to extinguish it. Turn off the power supply and cut off the circuit breaker if it is safe to do so. Call your emergency services. If you plan to have fires often _(ha-ha),_ invest in fire equipment.

## Toxic materials, including fumes and dust
Even common digital electronics might have traces of harmful materials. They are most dangerous when ingested or inhaled. Therefore, **do not** consume food at your workspace. Always wash your hands thoroughly. Wear an appropriate face mask when dust or fumes are present.

Small dust particles and fumes from soldering flux are not good for you. Filter them out. Solder in well-ventilated conditions.

Some types of solder, especially old ones, contain lead. Lead fumes are not good for you. FFP2/N95 mask might not be good enough to filter the fumes; an FFP3/N100 mask is recommended. Avoid when possible.

If you need to drill anything, remember that dust particles are harmful, and you should avoid them, ideally by wearing a protective mask. Be especially careful when drilling PCBs: a common type of epoxy FR-4 used for PCBs is known to be an irritant when inhaled.

Naturally, if you use any chemicals, for instance, to etch circuit boards, follow the appropriate safety measures.

Some electrical components contain dangerous chemicals inside. Take care when working with electrolytic capacitors, batteries, CRTs, and magnetrons.

## Lasers and other forms of radiation
What else can we say but "pay attention to the warning signs, use appropriate safety measures"? Do not stare into lasers (i.e. in disc drives); avoid ultraviolet, strong electromagnetic fields, alpha, beta and gamma radiation.

## Cuts and other kinds of physical trauma
Working with sharp objects (drills, knives, wire cutters) might result in physical trauma. Cutting a major artery on the inside of your leg is especially dangerous and can be lethal. So, take special care to avoid using any sharps in a way that can damage your upper legs.

----

This should be it with all the ways you can hurt yourself while making a computer. Note that knowing about risks and taking active precautions against them makes making a computer reasonably safe. If you feel anxious and stressed out, please review the section related to [mental health](./000.md).

[**Up**](../readme.md)
